Hi, everyone.
In this lecture I'm going to talk about a very simple problem, but it's very important to take up this
problem for strengthening your concept of recursion.
Okay, so we will understand the concept of going towards the base case and coming back from the base case
through this example.
So you can also try this problem on your own before we dive into the code.
So the question is very simple.
We just need to simulate the same functionality as off of a for loop.
Using this particular problem, we have to print all the numbers one to N recursively in decreasing
order and in increasing order.
So we need to write two methods.
One let's say N is 5
The first method should print one, two, three, four, five.
Okay, the second method, that is for the increasing one.
And the second method if N is 5 then it should print output, like 5 4 3 .
2 1 that is the decreasing one.
Okay.
Now let's see how we can actually do it.
So let's see.
We have a method decreasing which prints the numbers in the decreasing order.
Okay.
So what we discussed was we will take one step and the rest of the steps will be taken by the recursion.
So what I can do in this decreasing method, I can say, okay, I know, the value of n, I will first print the
value of n.
Okay.
And then I will call the method decreasing of N-1 that will automatically print all the numbers
from n minus one till one.
Okay.
And in the base case, we can have a case that, okay, if we are reducing and if we react a point when the
number is zero, we can return.
Okay.
So let us see what is going to happen if let's say N is five.
This is this is for the recursive case and for the base case.
I can check.
If N is zero, we can return.
We don't do anything.
Okay.
You also have another case like if N is one print one and then return that is also fine.
Both of either of these cases would work I can start from let’s say N = 5.
What I will do.
I will print n
i.e I will print five.
I will make a call on N equal to four.
I'll print four.
I'll make a call on N = 3.
I will print 3 and make a call on N equal to two.
I’ll print 2 and make a call on an equal to one.
I’ll print 1 and
I'll make a call on N equal to zero.
I will say return
It will say return
Finally, what I got in the output is nothing but five, four, three, two, one.
That's how easy it is going to be.
Okay.
For
The increasing order.
What we need to do.
We need to do the work in this direction.
I will tell you
what changes we would make.
So let us first write the function for decreasing.
So I can say void decreasing int n so we have a base case.
If n is zero, we will stop.
That is return and.
Otherwise I can okay cout the value of n
And followed by a function call to dec(N-1)
That's it.
So any statements that are written before the function call	.
Okay.
So these are executed when you're going towards the base case.
And you're going towards the base case.
So anything that is coming before the function call will be executed when you're going towards the base case.
Now let me also run this code and
Show it to you ./ increasing decreasing.
And I think we should take input the value of N and then we should call this function.
Let's say N is 5 I get the output.
as five, four, three, two, one.
Now I also want to make a similar function for increasing part, but the good thing is there will be only
one line of change.
That is, you will change the order in which this statement is executed.
So if I put this statement here and, just to make it more clear, I'm going to rename the function as
increasing.
And you will see this is going to work perfectly fine and we will see why it is going to work.
Okay.
So let us try to think what this function is going to do.
So let us let me call decreasing and maybe then endl and let me call as increasing function
as well.
So if I say okay, five, I get the numbers in the decreasing order, I get the numbers and then increasing
order as well.
Let us try to see what this function is saying there.
So it is saying if you want to print the numbers in the increasing order from 1 to n, you will first print
all the numbers in the increasing order from 1 to n-1
Okay.
And then you will print the number n.
This is the work that is done by the recursion and this is the work that is done by you in the previous
code what you said.
you'll first print the number n and then you will print the numbers from n-1 till 1 in the
decreasing order.
Okay.
Now, you might be surprised how this single swapping of one line of code actually changed the order
in which the output is coming.
Effectively, what is happening is both the functions will have a same call stack
So first of all, you have main.
Then you call the function with let’s say n = 5 okay, so decreasing function first prints the values
So it prints five it makes a call on n = 4
Then it prints four.
It makes a call on n = 3
Then it makes a call on n = 2
Then it makes a call to n=1 and then it makes a call to n = 0
The same calls are being made by the increasing function as well.
Okay.
So if you pass in n and it makes a call to five, then it makes a call to four, then makes call to,
3 2 1.
Okay.
But the change is it is printing the statement after the call has been executed.
Okay, so after we have returned from the base case, it is going to print one.
After we have returned from one, it is going to print two, then it is going to print three, then
it is going to print four, then it is going to print five and that's it.
Okay, so this output.
Is generated by the increasing function and this output five, four, three, two, one.
It is generated by the decreasing function.
So here anything that is written before the function call.
Is executed.
While going toward the base case that is from the top to the bottom.
Okay.
I'm calling bottom as the base case.
And when you're coming from the bottom, towards the main thing that is top
Okay.
This is top is n and base case is 0
The top is n and base case is 0
So when you're coming from a smaller problem, towards a bigger problem.
Then that code is written after the function call.
Okay, so that is something you should always remember and it is going to help you a lot while solving
recursion problems when you need some problem solutions to be solved first and then combined, then
you would be doing this work after your function call.
Okay, so I hope these two concepts are now clear and that's all for this lecture.